The next topic is isomerism. So, till now you study about isomerism, what are isomerism?
They compounds having the same molecular formula, but different structural formula. But to be
more specific isomers are nothing but compounds having same molecular formula, but different
in their physical and chemical properties. So, different physical and chemical properties.
So, now under isomerism we will see two different topic that is structural isomerism
and stereo isomerism. So, here under structural isomerism if I want to define it is compounds
having same molecular formula, but different structural formula, different structural formula.
So, under stereo isomerism we will have the same molecular formula. They will also have the
same structure, but only different in their difference in the physical and chemical properties.
So, that is why we have defined isomers as same molecular formula, but different physical
and chemical properties. So, now under structural isomerism we will be studying chain isomerism,
position, functional, total isomerism, ring chain and metomerism. Under stereo isomerism there
are two topics that is configuration and conformational. Under configuration you will be studying
geometrical and optical isomerism. Now under structural isomerism first we will see chain isomerism
and position isomerism. I will take an example and tell you the difference between chain and position
isomerism. So, for coming to the definition part. So, chain isomerism is nothing, but
has compounds having same molecular formula, but it is different only in the number of carbon in
the main chain. Whereas position isomerism main chain will have the same number of carbon,
but only the substruents in the position of the substruents will vary in case of position isomerism.
So, now in 10 standard we have studied different isomers. So, we know that for methane,
let us see H 4, then E 10, C H 3, C H 3, then for propane, we cannot write
E 10 isomerism. So, there are no isomers possible. Coming to the next compound beauty.
So, beauty. So, it is C H 3, C H 2, C H 3, so I see H 2, C H 3, so I see H 2, C H 3. So,
there are two isomers possible here. So, it is C H 3, C H 3, C H 3, C H 3, C H 3. So,
1 is N beauty. And this one, so let me write the name, this is N beauty.
And here as per IUPAC, this will be 2 metal propane.
And as per the common name, it will be Iso beauty. So, this one is your IUPAC and this is your
common name. Coming to Pentane. So, we have studied, there are three isomers possible,
2, 3, 4, 5. This is N Pentane. The other isomers are C H 3,
5. So, this will be 2 metal beauty and as per IUPAC. And as per common name, this will be Iso
Pentane. And what about new Pentane? It will be C H 3, C H 3, C H 3, C H 3. So, these are the isomers
of Pentane. That is 1, 2 and 3. Again, the common name is new Pentane. Whereas, the IUPAC
name is 2, 2, die metal propane. So, we have seen for beauty, there are two isomers, Pentane,
there are three isomers. Now, we will see for H G Z. So, let me just first write the structure and show
you. So, for H G Z, you just C H 2, 4, 5, 6. So, this will be considered as one isomer. The next
let me start doing the branching, C H 3, C H 2, C H 3. So, this is one isomer.
The other isomer will be C H 2, C H, C H 3, then we can also write C H 3.
So, this is one isomer possible, then we have C H. So, these are the five isomers possible
for H G Z. So, now this would be called N H G Z. Now, this would be called, like you know,
please remember, if these substituent that isomethyl group only if it is in the second position,
we will name it as Iso. So, the common name will be Iso H G Z. And the IUPAC name would be
2 metal Pentane, 2 metal Pentane. Here we have the IUPAC name, because in the third position
this is a methyl group. So, this has only the IUPAC name, which is called 3 methyl Pentane.
So, now coming to the next one, in the second and third position there are methyl substituents.
So, this would be called 2 3 die methyl, butane and this would be 2 2 die methyl
butane or the common name would be, because in the second position there is a substituent.
So, this can be also called Neo H G Z. So, these are the different isomers for H G Z.
Now, coming to the difference between chain and position isomers. So, as per chain isomersum,
the number of carbon should be different in the main chain. So, now I consider let me number this
has 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. So, if I consider 1 and 2 they are chain isomers, because here we have like
you know number of carbon here is 6, here it is 5 in the long chain. So, these 2 are chain isomersum,
but when I consider these 2 that is 2 and 3, look at the number of carbon in the main chain. So,
here also it is 5, here also it is 5, only the substituent position is varying. So, this would be
position isomersum. Coming to this one and this one that is 1 and 4, again there will be a chain
isomersum, because number of carbon here is 6, here it is 4 in the main chain. Coming to this one,
that is 4 and 5, you can see the number of carbon in the longest chain is the same.
Only the substituent side taking different position. So, these 2 would be considered as
position isomersum. So, now for the alchains we have seen butane has 2 isomers, pentane 3 and
hexane 5 isomers. And you can also try heptane octane nonin and decay. Heptane has 9 octane has
18 nonin has 35 and decayness 75. You can try it out by drawing different isomers. Coming to the
next one isomersum of alchial groups. So, when we call an alchial group imagine we take a methane.
So, if we remove a hydrogen and substitute with a halogen or any substitutes we call that as a
methyl group. So, CH3 will be methyl group. Suppose I substitute with iodine let us say. So, here
there is no other isomer possible. Coming to ethyl group also if I put a substituent here,
either it is attached this side or that side it is the same thing. So, no isomers possible here.
Coming to propile group when it came to propane we found there were no isomers. But whereas,
in propile group we can see there are 2 isomers. One is suppose I substitute iodine here.
So, either this carbon or this carbon it is the first carbon. So, this will be one of the isomers
first isomers. That is it will be one isodopropane. Coming to the second isomers this isodine can be
substituted in the second position. So, I will write the second isomers like this.
So, in case of propile group there are 2 isomers possible. Coming to the next one,
biotile group c 4 h 9 and I am substituting with the chlorine. So, this is n butane. Now,
let me explain step by step. First we will write the 2 isomers possible for butane. So, these
are the 2 isomers n butane and 2 metal propane. Now, let us see like in a how we can differentiate
these 2. We can see these 2 c h 3 groups are identical same. So, let us number
it as 1. Now, these 2 carbons in the middle one they both are same because this is attached to
one metal group this is attached to one ethyl group. Similarly, this c h 2 group this is attached
to one ethyl group and this is metal. So, I will number these carbons as 2. Now, if I substitute
with chlorine. So, either I can substitute here that is c h 2 c l or I can substitute another one
that is c h 3 c h 2 here it will be c h chlorine and it will be c h 3 here. So, these are the
2 possible isomers when it is n butane. So, let us take these as 2 isomers. Coming to the next isomer
of butane we write it like this. Now, let us substitute with the halogen which is chlorine. So,
you can see that this c h 3 all of this c h 3 are identical all 3 are connected with one c
h. So, I will number all these carbons as 1 and the next carbon which is different is the
middle one. So, I will number this as 2. So, now the chlorine can either take one of these positions
it will be the same and it can take the second position. So, there are 2 possible isomers here also.
So, 2 plus 2 4. So, for butane chlorine like this there are 4 isomers possible.